                         Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for
                Computational Linguistics (ACL), Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 263-270.

This paper introduces new learning al-
gorithms for natural language processing
based on the perceptron algorithm. We
show how the algorithms can be efﬁciently
applied to exponential sized representa-
tions of parse trees, such as the “all sub-
trees” (DOP) representation described by
(Bod 1998), or a representation tracking
all sub-fragments of a tagged sentence.
We give experimental results showing sig-
niﬁcant improvements on two tasks: pars-
ing Wall Street Journal text, and named-
entity extraction from web data.

The perceptron algorithm is one of the oldest algo-
rithms in machine learning, going back to (Rosen-
blatt 1958). It is an incredibly simple algorithm to
implement, and yet it has been shown to be com-
petitive with more recent learning methods such as
support vector machines – see (Freund & Schapire
1999) for its application to image classiﬁcation, for
example.

This paper describes how the perceptron and
voted perceptron algorithms can be used for pars-
ing and tagging problems. Crucially, the algorithms
can be efﬁciently applied to exponential sized repre-
sentations of parse trees, such as the “all subtrees”
(DOP) representation described by (Bod 1998), or a
representation tracking all sub-fragments of a tagged
sentence. It might seem paradoxical to be able to ef-
ﬁciently learn and apply a model with an exponential
number of features.1 The key to our algorithms is the
1Although see (Goodman 1996) for an efﬁcient algorithm
for the DOP model, which we discuss in section 7 of this paper.

“kernel” trick ((Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor 2000)
discuss kernel methods at length). We describe how
the inner product between feature vectors in these
representations can be calculated efﬁciently using
dynamic programming algorithms. This leads to
polynomial time2 algorithms for training and apply-
ing the perceptron. The kernels we describe are re-
lated to the kernels over discrete structures in (Haus-
sler 1999; Lodhi et al. 2001).

A previous paper

(Collins and Duffy 2001)
showed improvements over a PCFG in parsing the
ATIS task. In this paper we show that the method
scales to far more complex domains. In parsing Wall
Street Journal text, the method gives a 5.1% relative
reduction in error rate over the model of (Collins
1999).
In the second domain, detecting named-
entity boundaries in web data, we show a 15.6% rel-
ative error reduction (an improvement in F-measure
from 85.3% to 87.6%) over a state-of-the-art model,
a maximum-entropy tagger. This result is derived
using a new kernel, for tagged sequences, described
in this paper. Both results rely on a new approach
that incorporates the log-probability from a baseline
model, in addition to the “all-fragments” features.

This paper focuses on the task of choosing the cor-
rect parse or tag sequence for a sentence from a
group of “candidates” for that sentence. The candi-
dates might be enumerated by a number of methods.
candi-
dates from a baseline probabilistic model: the model
of (Collins 1999) for parsing, and a maximum-
entropy tagger for named-entity recognition.

The choice of representation is central: what fea-
tures should be used as evidence in choosing be-

tween candidates? We will use a function 	


to denote a
 -dimensional feature vector that rep-
resents a tree or tagged sequence
possibilities for . An obvious example for parse
trees is to have one component of 
the counts of rules in the tree
Given a representation, and two structures

for each
rule in a context-free grammar that underlies the
trees. This is the representation used by Stochastic
Context-Free Grammars. The feature vector tracks
, thus encoding the

and
, the inner product between the structures can be

sufﬁcient statistics for the SCFG.

The idea of inner products between feature vectors
is central to learning algorithms such as Support
Vector Machines (SVMs), and is also central to the
ideas in this paper.
Intuitively, the inner product
is a similarity measure between objects: structures
with similar feature vectors will have high values for

 . More formally, it has been observed that

many algorithms can be implemented using inner
products between training examples alone, without
direct access to the feature vectors themselves. As
we will see in this paper, this can be crucial for the
efﬁciency of learning with certain representations.

This section formalizes the idea of linear models for
parsing or tagging. The method is related to the
boosting approach to ranking problems (Freund et
al. 1998), the Markov Random Field methods of
(Johnson et al. 1999), and the boosting approaches
for parsing in (Collins 2000).

In parsing the training examples are  !

to

to denote

tree for that sentence.

We discuss one
method for setting the weights, the perceptron algo-
rithm, in the next section.

Figure 1(a) shows the perceptron algorithm applied
to the ranking task. The method assumes a training
set as described in section 3.1, and a representation

 of parse trees. The algorithm maintains a param-
eter vector1

, which is initially set to be all zeros.
The algorithm then makes a pass over the training
set, only updating the parameter vector when a mis-
take is made on an example. The parameter vec-
tor update is very simple, involving adding the dif-
ference of the offending examples’ representations
Intu-
itively, this update has the effect of increasing the
parameter values for features in the correct tree, and
downweighting the parameter values for features in
the competitor.

See (Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor 2000) for dis-
cussion of the perceptron algorithm, including an
overview of various theorems justifying this way of
setting the parameters. Brieﬂy, the perceptron algo-
rithm is guaranteed3 to ﬁnd a hyperplane that cor-
rectly classiﬁes all training points, if such a hyper-
plane exists (i.e., the data is “separable”). Moreover,
the number of mistakes made will be low, providing
that the data is separable with “large margin”, and

3To ﬁnd such a hyperplane the algorithm must be run over
the training set repeatedly until no mistakes are made. The al-
gorithm in ﬁgure 1 includes just a single pass over the training
set.

Figure 1: a) The perceptron algorithm for ranking problems. b) The algorithm in dual form.

(Freund & Schapire 1999) describe a reﬁnement of
the perceptron algorithm, the “voted perceptron”.
They give theory which suggests that the voted per-
ceptron is preferable in cases of noisy or unsepara-
ble data. The training phase of the algorithm is un-
changed – the change is in how the method is applied
to test examples.

(Freund & Schapire
1999) give theorems showing that the voted per-
ceptron (a variant described below) generalizes well
even given non-separable data.

Figure 1(b) shows an equivalent algorithm to the
perceptron, an algorithm which we will call the
“dual form” of the perceptron. The dual-form al-
gorithm does not store a parameter vector 1
 . 

Figure 2: a) An example parse tree. b) The sub-trees of the NP
covering the man. The tree in (a) contains all of these subtrees,
as well as many others.

Be-
cause of this the voted perceptron can be imple-
mented with the same number of kernel calculations,
and hence roughly the same computational complex-
ity, as the original perceptron.

We now consider a representation that tracks all sub-
trees seen in training data, the representation stud-
ied extensively by (Bod 1998). See ﬁgure 2 for
an example.


Figure 3: a) A tagged sequence. b) Example “fragments”
of the tagged sequence: the tagging kernel is sensitive to the
counts of all such fragments.


The second problem we consider is tagging, where
each word in a sentence is mapped to one of a ﬁnite
set of tags. The tags might represent part-of-speech
tags, named-entity boundaries, base noun-phrases,
or other structures. In the experiments in this paper
we consider named-entity recognition.

The par-
ticular representation we consider is similar to the
all sub-trees representation for trees. A tagged-
sequence “fragment” is a subgraph that contains a
subsequence of state labels, where each label may
or may not contain the word below it. See ﬁgure 3
for an example. Each tagged sequence is represented

respectively. Each state has an asso-
ciated label and an associated word. We deﬁne

The inner product under this representation can
be calculated using dynamic programming in a very
similar way to the tree algorithm. 

Figure 4: Results on Section 23 of the WSJ Treebank. LR/LP
= labeled recall/precision. CBs = average number of crossing

model 2 of (Collins 1999). VP is the voted perceptron with the
tree kernel.

We used the same data set as that described in
(Collins 2000). The Penn Wall Street Journal tree-
bank (Marcus et al. 1993) was used as training and
test data. Sections 2-21 inclusive (around 40,000
sentences) were used as training data, section 23
was used as the ﬁnal test set. Of the 40,000 train-
ing sentences, the ﬁrst 36,000 were used to train
the perceptron. The remaining 4,000 sentences were
used as development data, and for tuning parame-
ters of the algorithm. Model 2 of (Collins 1999) was
used to parse both the training and test data, produc-
ing multiple hypotheses for each sentence.
In or-
der to gain a representative set of training data, the

The algorithm in 1(b)

runs in approximately quadratic time in the number
of training examples. This made it somewhat ex-
pensive to run the algorithm over all 36,000 training
sentences in one pass. Instead, we broke the training
set into 6 chunks of roughly equal size, and trained
6 separate perceptrons on these data sets. This has
the advantage of reducing training time, both be-
cause of the quadratic dependence on training set
size, and also because it is easy to train the 6 models
in parallel. The outputs from the 6 runs on test ex-
amples were combined through the voting procedure
described in section 3.4.

The boosting method of (Collins 2000) showed
89.6%/89.9% recall and precision on reranking ap-
proaches for the same datasets (sentences less than
100 words in length). 

(Bod 2001) describes
experiments giving 90.6%/90.8% recall and preci-
sion for sentences of less than 40 words in length,
using the all-subtrees representation, but using very
different algorithms and parameter estimation meth-
ods from the perceptron algorithms in this paper (see
section 7 for more discussion).

Over a period of a year or so we have had over one
million words of named-entity data annotated. The
data is drawn from web pages, the aim being to sup-
port a question-answering system over web data. A
number of categories are annotated: the usual peo-
ple, organization and location categories, as well as
less frequent categories such as brand-names, scien-
tiﬁc terms, event titles (such as concerts) and so on.
As a result, we created a training set of 53,609 sen-
tences (1,047,491 words), and a test set of 14,717
sentences (291,898 words).

The task we consider is to recover named-entity
boundaries. We leave the recovery of the categories
of entities to a separate stage of processing. We eval-
uate different methods on the task through precision
and recall.7 The problem can be framed as a tag-
ging task – to tag each word as being either the start
of an entity, a continuation of an entity, or not to
be part of an entity at all. As a baseline model we
used a maximum entropy tagger, very similar to the
one described in (Ratnaparkhi 1996). Maximum en-
tropy taggers have been shown to be highly com-
petitive on a number of tagging tasks, such as part-
of-speech tagging (Ratnaparkhi 1996), and named-
entity recognition (Borthwick et. al 1998). Thus
the maximum-entropy tagger we used represents a
serious baseline for the task. We used a feature
set which included the current, next, and previous
word; the previous two tags; various capitalization
and other features of the word being tagged (the full
feature set is described in (Collins 2002a)).

Figure 5: Results for the max-ent and voted perceptron meth-
ods. “Imp.” is the relative error reduction given by using the

which keeps the top 20 hypotheses at each stage of
a left-to-right search. In training the voted percep-
tron we split the training data into a 41,992 sen-
tence training set, and a 11,617 sentence develop-
ment set. The training set was split into 5 portions,
and in each case the maximum-entropy tagger was
trained on 4/5 of the data, then used to decode the
remaining 1/5. In this way the whole training data
was decoded. The top 20 hypotheses under a beam
search, together with their log probabilities, were re-
covered for each training sentence. In a similar way,
a model trained on the 41,992 sentence set was used
to produce 20 hypotheses for each sentence in the
development set.

As in the parsing experiments, the ﬁnal kernel in-
corporates the probability from the maximum en-
tropy tagger, i.e.

Figure 5 shows results on the test data

for the baseline maximum-entropy tagger, and the
voted perceptron. The results show a 15.6% relative
improvement in F-measure.

(Bod 1998) describes quite different parameter esti-
mation and parsing methods for the DOP represen-
tation. The methods explicitly deal with the param-
eters associated with subtrees, with sub-sampling of
tree fragments making the computation manageable.
Even after this, Bod’s method is left with a huge
grammar:

over 5 million sub-structures. The method requires
search for the 1,000 most probable derivations un-
der this grammar, using beam search, presumably a
challenging computational task given the size of the
grammar.
In spite of these problems, (Bod 2001)
gives excellent results for the method on parsing
Wall Street Journal text. The algorithms in this paper
have a different ﬂavor, avoiding the need to explic-
itly deal with feature vectors that track all subtrees,
and also avoiding the need to sum over an exponen-
tial number of derivations underlying a given tree.

(Goodman 1996) gives a polynomial time con-
version of a DOP model into an equivalent PCFG
whose size is linear in the size of the training set.
The method uses a similar recursion to the common
sub-trees recursion described in this paper. Good-
man’s method still leaves exact parsing under the
model intractable (because of the need to sum over
multiple derivations underlying the same tree), but
he gives an approximation to ﬁnding the most prob-
able tree, which can be computed efﬁciently.

From a theoretical point of view, it is difﬁcult to
ﬁnd motivation for the parameter estimation meth-
ods used by (Bod 1998) – see (Johnson 2002) for
discussion.
In contrast, the parameter estimation
methods in this paper have a strong theoretical basis
(see (Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor 2000) chapter 2
and (Freund & Schapire 1999) for statistical theory
underlying the perceptron).

For related work on the voted perceptron algo-
rithm applied to NLP problems, see (Collins 2002a)
and (Collins 2002b). (Collins 2002a) describes ex-
periments on the same named-entity dataset as in
this paper, but using explicit features rather than ker-
nels. (Collins 2002b) describes how the voted per-
ceptron can be used to train maximum-entropy style
taggers, and also gives a more thorough discussion
of the theory behind the perceptron algorithm ap-
plied to ranking tasks.
Acknowledgements Many thanks to Jack Minisi for
annotating the named-entity data used in the exper-
iments. Thanks to Rob Schapire and Yoram Singer
for many useful discussions.

